---
title:  "Agile Sprint Planning Meetings"
date:   2019-09-25
categories: agile
---

Sprint plannings. You may or may not do them. You may have tried doing them at
one point, but gave up because you found them useless. Perhaps they seemed like
a waste of time.

If you're still doing them and they're working for you, great! If you've
stopped for any reason, that's ok. If you've never tried them, perhaps you give
it a shot after reading this?

Every team that I've worked on in the past runs sprint plannings differently.
Some were ok, some were great, and some were really bad. So how should we run
them so that they are effective? The answer isn't all that obvious because if
you ask ten devs about what a sprint planning meeting is (or should be), then
you'll probably get ten different answers (opinions).

So let's try to clear some things up.

# What are they not?

We'll start here. What are sprint planning meetings _not_ about? This is
actually very important, because introducing extraneous practices into sprint
plannings will eat away at valuable time that should be used for things that
actually make sprint plannings useful.

Some of these may sound familiar to you, so let's just run through a few things
that sprint planning meetings are _not_.

## Roadmap Discussions

Roadmap discussions should be left for, roadmap discussions. These discussions
are very broad and focused on targets that are beyond the reach of one sprint
cycle. A sprint planning will lose traction if the team swings to talking about
the roadmap and what should or shouldn't be on the roadmap.

A sprint planning should focus on items that are going to be done _during the
upcoming sprint_. It's ok if discussions touch on how a certain story relates
to the roadmap items and helps accomplish them, but that's it. Once the
conversation shifts away from the upcoming stories, the sprint planning has
fallen off the tracks.

Sprint planning is _not_ roadmapping.

## Writing Stories

This one may quite possibly be the most annoying of all things that occur
during sprint plannings, but should take place elsewhere. Coming into a sprint
planning, we should already have a good idea of "what's next" or "what can we
do next". The only things we have to answer at a sprint planning are "what do
we plan on doing next?"

All stories that are being considered for the upcoming sprint should already
have been thought-out and well-written. The only thing remaining, which should
be done at a sprint planning, is to look at all those "ready for sprint
planning" stories and prioritize which of them the team will attempt to
complete in the upcoming week or two.

Questions about these stories are fair game. Tweaking details about these
stories is also fair game. Deciding that a story isn't ready yet and punting on
it is fair game. However, starting with a one liner story, and discovering
details and writing them outo while the rest of the team stares into oblivion
is _not_ fair game. It's a huge waste of time, so we don't do this at sprint
planning.

If there are no stories with sufficient detail for consideration, then there is
no material for a sprint planning to occur. That must change before sprint
planning meetings are to be effective.

## Browsing the Internet

One should not come to sprint planning in order to browse hot new deals on
Amazon. Nor should they come to sprint planning so they can clean up their
inbox. In fact, one should not even need their laptop open _unless_ they are
either running the meeting, or trying to answer a question related to a story
that is being considered at the meeting.

Any other activities by attendees of the sprint planning are simply
disrespectful. Everyone should participate in the planning meeting. Those that
need not participate need not attend.

## Therapy Sessions

I've seen no shortage of sprint plannings that have turned into hour-long
therapy sessions for the team. Lots of talking happens, usually complaining,
the complaining is usually about _other_ teams and the entire company, how life
on this team is so hard and all the things that are hard about it.

Stop. That's not sprint planning.

If life is really so hard on this team, then it is fair game to use the sprint
planning to _plan_ the things that need to get done this sprint in order to
make life easier next sprint. But the complaining needs to take place elsewhere.

Also, prior to sprint planning, the stories that are intended to make life
eaiser should be well-thought-out, written-out, and clearly articulating how
they will help solve some problem or annoyance. As mentioned previously, sprint
planning is _not_ the time to be writing these out.

# Then what _is_ sprint planning really all about?

It's about ... planning the upcoming sprint. And everybody in the room
participates. There should be backlogged stories that are pointed, ready-to-go,
and roughly prioritized. The team goes through that list and commits to
completing a subset of that list deemed as important _and_ doable.

This is a good opportunity to select stories that follow some particular theme
in order to focus efforts in one direction and get things done faster. The
person leading the planning should have an idea of where the team wants/needs
to go next and should steer the story selection in that direction.

If there are new concerns or questions about particular stories, now is the
time to bring those up. Everybody should be familiar with most (if not all) of
the stories on the table, and so there shouldn't be a need to go through each
story in grave detail. Any relevant details necessary for completing the story
should _already be in_ the story.

_If_ this is how sprint planning meetings are run, then they _should_ be quick
(30 minutes or less), effective, and painless.

## Where do these ready-to-go stories come from?

The stakeholder. Whoever wants something done, should elaborate on that in a
story. Put in all relevant details, and run it by the team. For small and
simple stories, running it by the team asynchronously may be sufficient. For
things that are more involved, a workshop (more on this in an upcoming blog)
may be necessary. In either case, we want the team to agree that the story has
enough details and point it when ready.

## But wait! When do we point stories?

The best time for this is at a workshop, when all team members have full
context of the story in their heads. All questions have just been answered, all
ambiguities should have been resolved, and if everybody is on the same page
then pointing a story should take 5-15 seconds per story. At this point, the
story is ready for consideration at sprint planning.

If a story never goes through workshop (because it's so simple or
straightforward) then asynch pointing is possible. It's _ok_ if somebody
suggests a point value in slack and the rest of the team agrees or wants to
bump. If pointing over slack is absolutely unacceptable for a given team, then
it's ok to wait until next workshop to point these. As a last result, pointing
in sprint planning is not the end of the world either.

# So what else?

That's about it when it comes to sprint planning meetings. To reiterate two
important points, they are preparation and participation.

1. Each story for consideration at sprint planning should be ready-to-go
1. Everyone at planning should be fully participating

These two key points that will help bring most value to any sprint planning
meeting. The meetings can always be adjusted to match team preferences and
dynamics, but if everyone is prepared and everyone is participating, then
sprint plannings should be a breeze.
